V -> e
W -> t
Q -> h (the)
N -> o  (to)
I -> r (heRe)
T -> a (that)
O -> d (reaD)
G -> n (eNtered)
C -> f (for)
X -> i (It)
P -> s (hiS)
S -> l (Life)
R -> w (was)
A -> b (born)
D -> u (about)
F -> y (way)
L -> k (booKs)
H -> c (attaChed)
Z -> m (Mission)
U -> p (diPlomat)
K -> v (haVe)
Y -> x (eXperts)
J -> g (younGer) 
B -> q (techinQue)
E -> j (inJury)
M -> z (horizontal)

Text itself:
vigenere was born in the village of saint-pourcain, about half way between paris and marseilles, 
on april 5, 1523. at 24, he entered the service of the duke of nevers, to whose house he 
remained attached the rest of his life, except for periods at court and as a diplomat. in 1549, 
at 26, he went to rome on a two-year diplomatic mission.it was here that he was first thrown 
into contact with cryptology, and he seems to have steeped himself in it. he read the books 
of trithemius,belaso, and other writers, and the unpublished manuscript of alberti. 
he evidently conversed with the experts of the papal curia, for he tells anecdotes that he 
could have heard only in the shoptalk of thesecryptologists. at 47, vigenere quit the court, 
turned over his annuity of 1,000 livres a year to the poor of paris, married the much younger 
marievare, and devoted himself to his writing. his traicte des chiffres, which was written 
in 1585 despite the distraction of a year-old baby daughter,appeared, elegantly rubricated, in 
1586, and was reprinted the following year. his autokey system used the plaintext as the key. 
it provided apriming key. this consisted of a single letter, known to both enciphererand 
decipherer, with which the decipherer could decipher the first cryptogram letter and so get a 
start on his, work. with this, he would get the first plaintext letter, then use this as 
the key to decipher the second cryptogram letter, use that plaintext as the key to decipher 
the third cryptogram letter, and so on.the system works well and affords fair guarantees of 
security; it has been embodied in a number of modern cipher machines.in spite of vigenere's 
clear exposition of his technique, it was entirely forgotten and only entered the stream of 
cryptology late in the 19th century after it had been reinvented. writers on cryptology then 
added insult to injury by degrading vigenere's system into one much more elementary.the cipher 
now universally called the vigenere employs only standard alphabets and a short repeating 
keyword—a system far more susceptible to solution than vigenere's autokey. its 
tableauconsists of a modern tabula recta: 26 standard horizontal alphabets,each slid one space 
to the left of the one above. these are the cipher alphabets. a normal alphabet for the 
plaintext stands at the top. another normal alphabet, which merely repeats the initial 
letters of the horizontal ciphertext alphabets, runs down the left side. this is the key 
alphabet.both correspondents must know the keyword. the encipherer repeats this above the 
plaintext letters until each one has a keyletter. he seeks the plaintext letter in the top 
alphabet and the key letter in the side. then he traces down from the top and in from the side. 
the ciphertext letter stands at the intersection of the column and the row. the 
encipherer repeats this process with all the letters of the plaintext. to decipher, 
the clerk begins with the key letter, runs in along the ciphertext alphabet until he strikes 
the cipher letter, then follows the column of letters upward until he emerges at the 
plaintext letter at the top.polyalphabetic ciphers were, when used with mixed alphabets 
and without word divisions, unbreakable to the cryptanalysts of the renaissance. why, then, did 
the nomenclator reign supreme for 300 years? why did cryptographers not use the polyalphabetic 
system instead?